Okay, I guess the tape is rolling, so we might as well start. First of all, I
wondered how you became involved in science fiction when you were younger. Did
you read it a lot when you were young? Yes, I started reading science fiction, I
suppose, about the earliest form of literature that I read. I never made a
mental distinction between science fiction, fantasy, anything of that nature
because my parents brought it to me to read and I just simply regarded it as the
most interesting reading material that I had accessible. So naturally, when I
began turning to writing, that's what I wrote.
Why did you start writing science fiction? Well, actually, they took my
television program off the air. Our television, at that time, I was 10.
Television hadn't been around in private homes very long. I had just time enough
to get thoroughly addicted to television science fiction, and then it ran its
course, and it was gone from the air. So I, in a fit of mourning, went into the
bedroom, picked up a tablet and pencil, and started writing my own novels.
Your first published novel, I think, was around 1976, The Gate of Ivrel? Yes,
yes. Had you published any stories before then? No, not for want of trying, but
I've never regarded myself as a short story writer. I don't tend to think in
that convenient length. And consequently, I wrote novels and novels and novels
and was actually turned in Brothers of Earth first. And since there seemed to be
some question about it being a little long, as many of my works tend to be. I
very, very quickly wrote Gate of Ivrel while teaching school, et cetera, and
managed to get it finished inside two months.
One thing I wondered is, you said that you didn't distinguish between science
fiction and the other reading that you did, but I wonder why you didn't do some
other kind of writing instead of science fiction I think you could have been a
writer in almost any area that you tried I don't write the other things because
I don't like them in general I find that I suppose the only thing outside of
science fiction that I've ever tried my hand at writing has been mysteries and I
don't care for the modern fashion of those and I've always viewed them is a
great deal more fun to read than they are to write, mostly because you have to
be extremely controlled, and I suspect that mystery writers have to know who did
it. And I'd rather not know the end of my books. The other thing that I've tried
my hand at is historical fiction, and I find, again, that's a straight jacket
because you're rather well held with what happened, whether or not it makes
artistic sense. So, just for the sheer pleasure of writing, I prefer science
fiction.
Okay, was it Donald Wollheim that published that first book? Yes, it was. Have
you established any contact or made any attempts, or was that the first one that
you'd sent out? No. You mean with other publishing houses and what have you? No,
with Donald Wollheim. Well, actually, I grew fascinated with Wollheim as an editor
because I had gone through my library finally after seven years of trying to
sell things, and I thought, well, there must be a system to this. You see, I had
no professional help at all. And I began searching my library to see what editor
had published the majority of works and writers that I liked, figuring that we
might have something in common as far as taste goes. So I began researching Don
Wollheim to see what his preferences were, where we differed, and where we were
similar. And so I began to conclude more and more that we were fairly well
Simpatico when it came to taste. Not quite the same all the way down the line,
but generally there's a broad area of overlap. So I found him very easy to work
with. Okay, I just had one more question on your background and so forth. Do you
identify or do you think there are any influences, either writers or anything in
your background, I guess in terms of science fiction writers, that had any
influence on you in the way you write? Well, it's very difficult to pin it down
because I am one of the most Catholic science fiction readers you're likely to
find. I read everything I can get my hands on and always have. I'm a speed
reader. But classically speaking, I suppose that Publius Virgilius Morrow is one
of the outstanding influences on my writing simply because he's one writer that
I spend an enormous amount of time with, at least historically speaking, when I
was doing my studies. In terms of science fiction writers that have had a great
deal of influence on me, I can remember some of the early works that I read were
Um, Heinlein, Asimov, Norton, um, uh, Harry Bates, um, uh, Howard, Robert
Howard. It was very difficult in the town that I grew up in to find any science
fiction. Jack Williamson was one. Um, and Edgar Rice Burroughs and so on. I, um,
by the time that, um, you see, I kept getting run out of the store. They would
locate a juvenile back there in the science fiction section, and immediately
they would begin to suggest that possibly I should be looking at the Dick and
Jane novels somewhere else. So I did have a little difficulty both in library
and in bookstores trying to get out with science fiction books undetected.
Okay, I think you said you'd sent out or written Brothers of Earth before
Gedevebrel, but I still wanted to ask why you so early got into writing the, I
guess I would call it heroic fantasy. I'm not sure that's how you'd identify
with Gedevebrel. But why did you sort of begin with that kind of a... Well, I
didn't. They weren't the first books that I had written. there are others which
are tentative efforts that didn't pan out in one way or another everybody, I
won't say everybody but a majority of writers tend to have them my first love is
really technology the only thing is that I had been out of the technological
mainstream while they had made numerous scientific advances that I was not
current with, and it annoys me a great deal to feel that I'm writing something
that is not technically accurate or that I have glossed over something. It
irritates me personally to postulate, well, for instance, we have a gravity
field here which keeps everyone's feet on the deck, I want to know how it works.
So, consequently, I wrote heroic fantasy while I was doing a great deal of
reading in Scientific American. Also, heroic fantasy is an area where I have a
good deal of expertise since I have a major in classics, history, archaeology,
anthropology, this sort of thing. But I'd always been a sort of a hobbyist, and
a little more than a hobbyist since it was one of my fields in the history of
technology.
Okay. I'm not sure I'm going to pronounce some of these names right, so after I
hear you pronounce them, we'll get them right when we do the show. All right. I
guess it's Morgaine. Yes. I still have a little puzzlement about her. was she a
creature or a force existing before the call? I'm not sure how that's
pronounced. The call, well, actually, now there's some of this that I'm not
about to give away as regards to the history of Morgaine because that gets into
the possibility of a book that I'm working on at the moment. The first set of
the books, the gate books, involves much more the character of Vanye, who is a
medieval man. I have to take his viewpoint or they cease to be heroic fantasy
and they begin to be a science fiction novel, pure and simple, because Morgaine
is far more technologically sophisticated than he is and if it were told from
her viewpoint it would begin to be a thing of numbers and calculus.
Morgaine is far more advanced, exactly where she comes from and what she is,
I've preferred to leave to the reader's estimation, although I will say that
your surmises are fairly well down the center. Okay, that's why I wasn't sure. I
thought maybe I missed something. I thought you were being a little ambiguous.
It is deliberately vague, partially because the character of Morgaine has evolved
as I've done it, also partially because I have wished to keep those books as
heroic fantasy or the reason that the technology of the gates is so vague that
again I prefer to know how things work and since that one is far more
fantastical than some of the other technology I work with I prefer to keep it in
the realm of fantasy. Okay you also just said that you might be working or you
are working on some more books that might involve that material. I was going to
ask, when you started the first book, did you have the idea of a trilogy? No.
Actually, the first book quit where it quit, except that they had been entered
into the books and print of a series, which rather surprised me. And so I
thought, well, why not? For a little while I found it relaxing, and to a certain
extent still do. to alternate both my reading and my writing of hard tech with
fantasy, because I do produce at an enormous rate compared to some other writers
who may labor one or two years on a book. Well, a good deal of anyone working on
a book for one of two years is not writing time, it's thinking time. And because
physically, to write it down takes a precious little while. You can write any
given book down in less than a month. You can just think it up. So I have found
that to give my imagination a rest, as it were, it does really help to shift
gears between books. That's why I tend to do things which are radically
different one from the other. I may worry over a similar theme. I may do it once
in science fiction and once in fantasy, thus providing endless amusement or
fodder for reviewers who are trying to find some sort of a common theme. Well,
basically, it's just that I'd just finished working with that and it was still
rattling around in my head, so I did it in a different medium, just as an artist
may tend to paint a lot in blue because that's the color they had last on their
palette. I don't think there's any particularly deep significance to some of
these similarities, just that some of the works were done in sort of opposition
to each other, different types, different styles. Was there any reader response
that made you continue with that series? Well, there has been a great deal of
reader response. and I think that...
It's a very... I had a great deal of fun writing it. I look back on it and
decide I had a great deal of fun writing it. Sometimes the character of Morgaine
irritated me so much that I was just about ready to give up and throw in the
towel while I was creating it. I think I tend to sympathize much more with
Vanye.
But yes, there has been a very strong reader response to it And I've always had
really a great affection for this trilogy myself It's one of the few works that
I have really felt that I could go back to And possibly do another three books
Usually, when you've written enough You know, when you've written three books on
anything, you tend to be burned out on it. Because while the reader may devour
it in a single night or series of nights, and it's gone, for the writer, you had
to live with it constantly for, you know, the better part of a year on each
segment. So for some curious reason, and more game books are one of the only
ones that I really find easy to return to. Okay, you mentioned that Vanye was a
medieval man, and of course, heroic fantasy, I guess a lot of the elements of it
go back to the medieval formulas, but it seems to me that you have in some ways
reversed the normal formula in making the, I guess, the heroic part of the book
a woman and her, I don't know what you'd want to call him, her, you know, not
sidekick, but her helper. I guess the male. Yeah, I've heard some readers
respond that they were, you know, not surprised at that, but it was a little
unusual to have the male in that position. Well, I think that it's, there is
some, of course, literary tradition for it. The notion of courtly love, I
suppose, is one possibility.
there is also the fact that
in terms of the age at which those characters were created I had really
conceived both characters when I was about probably 14 and again I think a
reason why it's much easier for me to return to those because they almost come
out of my extreme youth and I suppose one always has an affection for things of
that sort they are sort of archetypal with us but in one form or another they
are very early creations of mine. And as such, that was the time at which I was
really just beginning to toy with being able to do male characters at all. Of
course, the version that is in print was done completely separate from any of
the earlier works. I didn't look at or refer to the earlier works when I did
this, when I did Gate of Ivrel, I just sort of remembered it a long time ago,
but I suppose that's the reason that the characters formed the way they did.
There's also the fact that I think that artistically, to me, made a fairly
interesting story in terms of the relationship between the two characters, the
fact that Vanye's besetting sin, if you will, is arrogance, pride, and temper.
And if you can conceive of any situation for a medieval man in which arrogance,
pride, and temper are going to get a little frayed, it's this sort of situation.
Okay. I'm going to go ahead and move on to a whole new topic. I think one of the
things that impressed me the most, and I'm sure that impresses most of your
readers greatly is your construction of alien cultures. And I was curious as to
whether you use models or analogs for them, or do you create them out of thin
air? Yes and no and both. One of my areas of study, as before mentioned, is
anthropology. I've also done a great deal of study in ecology, biology,
genetics, although strictly as an amateur in that field because it is a very
complex one.
And in a way, I do take some items from the knowledge that I have of earthly,
animals, cultures, communities, ecosystems, and so on. But most of my knowledge
of human culture is, again, rather strange in that I know the prehistoric or
bronze age, that whole span, up to the Iron Age, much better than I do, say
later periods so a great deal of what I know about human history is so basic or
lies so far back down the time track that a divergence from what happened at any
given point is going to produce massive alterations in an urban culture much
further along the line. Consequently, for instance, when I did the Faded Sun
novels, which are basically a desert culture, I did not pattern it off any
modern desert culture about which I know, frankly, nothing. I patterned it
strictly by taking what I know about desert survival and earlier nomadic
cultures here on earth. I contrived a biology that would work under the extreme
conditions that I postulated, and then drew elements from here and there. It's
very strange that I now get letters from people that say that it very closely
resembles a modern terrestrial nomadic culture. But this is strictly a surprise
to me. I suppose it just says that I knew something about the very ancient ones.
Okay.
Why does, I guess in many of your books, I would even say the majority, you
somehow in the book have a theme or a motif of alien-human closeness. you know,
sometimes your humans actually become part of an alien civilization. If they
don't, at least they become very close to it. Why does that fascinate you so
much?
Well, partly I suppose it's what I said earlier, that one tends to toss one idea
around until you've got that color completely off your palate. I don't know how
long it will continue to fascinate me. I suppose there's a limit to how much one
can say about any given thing. And not all of my novels involve aliens. Among
those novels, I count some that are not yet published, but are only partially
complete. If I say that I have about 13 works in progress at the moment, you may
understand.
So what is on the stand is sort of the tip of the iceberg, at least as far as my
body at work. But, indeed, I do a great deal of it. I think part of the
fascination for it lies in the fact that I, myself, have been a lifelong student
of cultures. And if there's anything that I can conceive of that is slightly
stranger than being lost in Greece and unable to speak the local dialect, it's
being lost somewhere else and in even worse shape, and managing to survive it.
It pleases me also because it is a type of conflict that one can develop that
does not involve necessarily everyone taking sides, lining up, and starting to
shoot at each other, although this sometimes does happen.
It's sort of like the man against nature story. You can have a very exciting
story about a man who is simply trying to survive in a hostile environment. Some
environments don't involve icebergs. They involve cities. they involve cultures
that you've never met before. And I do hope, just as a matter of practical
philosophy, that one thing this age of ours has begun to produce is an
understanding in the human race that we can not only get along with each other,
we can get along with other creatures on the same planet, and perhaps it is the
final lesson that any species learns before they are fit to set foot in space.
at least I hope this is the case, which may guarantee the peaceful intention of
potential neighbors. I think you sort of answered my next question, which was
going to be if you deliberately counterpointed alien and human cultures, you
just suggested there would be a value to that, that we should learn to live with
other species and so forth. But that would be a fair statement, that you do
counterpoint? Yes. One of the most difficult things on the face of the earth,
for instance, is for two people who do not speak each other's language well to
communicate. It's also certainly true, as diplomats have discovered for
centuries, that you can speak someone else's language perfectly and still have
trouble getting your point across, simply because language extends into time,
history, and accumulated meanings as well as it does just the present meanings
which are contained in the dictionary. Context and history have a great bearing
on language. So that when you begin to talk about the difficulties of
communicating species to species, where you may even have a totally different
psychology, your problems are much more severe. It is also an area of ongoing
research in the scientific community, the studies that are done with primates,
the studies that are done with dolphins and with whales. Mankind as a whole,
outside of the science fiction field, is finally beginning to wake up to the
fact that you do not necessarily have to think like a human being to be, quote,
intelligent. That intelligence is a function of many different things. Anyone
who has ever taught in school will rapidly come to the conclusion that
intelligence is not a quantity that can be neatly assessed. It has to do with
spatial perceptions in relationships, with the ability to compare and to
analyze. Human intelligence is made up of many, many different factors. One may
be particularly gifted in one or more of them, not so gifted in others, and it
makes for a great range of abilities, even more so when you're dealing with
different species who may have completely different environments, whose visual
range may be different.
Some may see, for instance, into the infrared. Some may hear sounds which are
not audible, so on and so forth, just biologically speaking. So you may have a
psychology and a history that are very, very different from anything that we're
anticipating simply because of a biological barrier.
Okay, I guess I'll just move on to a question, questions on a few of your works.
Obviously, I'm not going to be able to hit all of your works. We don't have time
to do that, but there were a few of them I wanted to single out. I think it's
pronounced the Pride of Chanur, Chanur? Chanur. The Pride of Chanur.
Okay, let me just ask you this question first of all. Is it the hani? Hani. I
somehow receive the impression their society, their physical makeup, was in some
ways based on lions. Yes, absolutely. This is one case where I've taken the
species of lions and in a very simple way devised a culture of an advanced
species which very closely parallels the biology and, if you will, social
patterns of a lion pride. The title of the book, of course, is a three-way pun.
Meaning the pride of lions, the pride of the race, and the name of the ship? And
the ship, yes. all of which are involved together. And also, that would be why
the females are the ones who go spacefaring and the males stay at home. Yes.
Among the lions, you will notice it as the females who do the hunting. Okay, I'm
proud of myself. Figure that out. Tully, the human in that book, of course, he
is totally alone. He's a very pitiful creature, the only one of his kind, I
guess, until near the end of the book. very unheroic and you know it's a while
all of a sudden I realize I'm reading the book from an alien point of view and
here's a human being and I'm feeling sorry for him which is unusual
I guess that was just for the line of the story or do you do that on purpose to
give us a different maybe perspective on humanity have you ever seen a baboon
react to a leopard no it's raw terror A primate's nervous system is not really
set up to be setting in the center of a pride of lions. It's really one of the
most unkind things I believe that you could do to a human being as far as social
patterns would be to drop them right into the middle of a feline culture
because the moves are all wrong. Well, for instance, Tully, being a primate,
smiles, and of course this is exactly the wrong thing to do. You know what a
lion does when it smiles. It's not a friendly gesture. Every gesture he makes is
wrong. Every gesture they make is wrong, at least as far as he's concerned. He
is, however, a very heroic human being if you just simply analyze what he has
done. He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation. He has managed to
collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which would have broken
drastically. Any average individual would have definitely come out of it
damaged. he's been forced to take horrendous decisions and he's been dumped into
a situation where even his personal value is of some question and yet he manages
to stand up on his hind feet and confront the hani captain with a here I am
come and see if you can do something about it kind of attitude which is of
course what wins the captain's respect in the beginning. He calms down a little
bit, as you will see, when he begins trying to deal with them, doing what any
sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where you suspect that
the beings around you are at least essentially friendly and there's no need
provoking something that would be a total misunderstanding. standing so he does
remain a little bit quiet but he's he's quiet partially because he's smart and
is trying to absorb more data than he gives out okay i see that now um i suppose
yeah in terms of what where he was i guess he was sort of courageous individual
let me move on for just a second to down below station um the plotting in the
setting of that novel impressed me a great deal. Did you use a strict
extrapolation to devise the society and the company and the merchants and the
way you set that book up? Yes. I follow the NASA reports. I'm a great supporter
of the space program, and I do follow it very, very closely, and one of the
things that has always interested me is the economic mechanisms, the reason for
going into space, the reason for colonization. I also recall being taught some
rather inaccurate things when I was back in primer school about the altruistic
motives for colonization to hear some of the old tales I heard. The Greeks all
went out and colonized the Mediterranean just because it was there or just
because they felt it would be a noble thing to do, which is very far from the
truth. It was economic necessity. And many of them were getting out of Greece
because the pressures at home were incredible. In this particular instance, I
simply took the situation that we presently have, and as
a background for the novel, I simply extrapolated our present situation forward
a couple of hundred years. and this is pretty well what i see going on based on
modern um modern economic necessity and a little bit of altruism in the sense
that science and science for the sake of science will continue if you like we've
already launched the first star probe our problem is that right now we haven't
got the budget or the research to enable them to do a loop and come back to us
but I imagine that early in the next century there will be such probes launched.
Was that book more difficult to plot and harder to write than your others? It
was a bear. It really was. I think because it was sort of a collection of all
the things that I had been trying to do up to that point. All the research, all
the reading that I had been doing and trying to rationalize this universe of
mine. To give it some sort of scientific accuracy, the one thing you have to
grant me is faster than light travel. Everything else I designed is at least
within near reach of our capabilities.
The plot is necessarily complex because we're dealing here with the future of
the human race. The human race is actually the character in this novel in one
odd sense. There are a number of specimens of it who are not too nice.
Fortunately, there are some who are, at least in my own estimation, good people.
And the novel follows the activities of a great many of them at a very hazardous
moment for humanity. that at which part of humanity is literally breaking free
of earth, never to come back again, and in which another portion of humanity is
trying to retain their heritage and to try to reach an accommodation between
what they were and what they are,
and manage to deal with the new realities that they're meeting at the same time.
Okay, this probably isn't a fair question to ask an author. I've had a number of
them say, make up your own mind.
But in terms of who you side with, if you side with anybody, I was probably
more, I identified more with Signy Mallory than anybody in the book, Would that
be anywhere near what you intended? To a certain extent, yes. Signe Mallory is a
very enigmatic individual in some ways. She's difficult even for her creator to
get a handle on. There are a number of things going on with her. to a certain
extent it disturbs me that she is
as heroic as she is because when you analyze what she does you really have to
line her up on the side of the not nice people on the other hand if you got into
an argument with her on morality she would point to the morality that created
the ghastly situation on the station and ask who got the better results. So,
Mallory is forever dealing in very, very uncomfortable paradoxes. Often even the
author does not like what Mallory does, but sometimes it is the most direct
solution that saves the greatest number of lives. She is, as I say, sort of an
uncomfortable figure. As that history of that world develops in subsequent
books,
I think it will become clear that Mallory's influence persists among those
people and it is not always a wholesome one. Mallory as Mallory can be a very
palatable, very appealing individual. The problem is that some people persist in
following her policies and come to less happy results. So it is a kind of a
novel that lays the foundation for a good many things. And for instance, the
security organization in The Faded Sun the rather sinister Vegas, I believe
his name, is several centuries down the road Mallory's creation.
Okay, that's interesting. I was just going to move on to that. Let me give you
one more question down below Station. Well, in fact, it applies to Faded Sun too
and a couple of your other books. You've already mentioned the fact that we have
to give you the faster than right travel. Still, concerning the so-called jump
and the space battles down below station. I don't think I read any more
convincing space battles than those.
And the faster the night travel, the jump, and so forth, you didn't make any
attempt at all to, and I guess you can't back it up or prove anything there, but
there was enough science behind that or enough, I don't know how you did it,
where it was convincing. Well, I worked very hard at it. I always loved Doc
Smith.
And one of the things that I always felt that I would like to bring back to the
field of science fiction, if I could, was the space yarn. I mean, for a long
time now, science fiction, we've been on planets, we've built cities, we've
gotten so earthbound that a lot of the romance of space flight itself has gone
unexpressed in literature. And I wish to be able to develop a mechanism which
would enable me to write, oddly enough, after working my brains out on it, this
simple kind of story that I used to enjoy when I was young. and I suddenly
realized that I was in up to my neck in relativistic time all sorts of things
one of the things that fascinated me when I began to work out the battles and
even there I took some shortcuts anyone who wants to get in and argue it I will
freely admit that there were some things I had to do for artistic value but but
one of the things that I began to discover was that in terms of being on one of
the ships in the battle, that suddenly in a very practical way I was up against
the Einsteinian stoppage of time, because when you are traveling near sea, near
the speed of light aboard one of those ships, all time has stopped. You exist at
one moment traveling forever. If you send a message, it can go no faster than
you do. You and that message will arrive at the same time. So essentially you
exist in a frozen segment of time, an event horizon which is perpetuating itself
across the system in which you're operating. And I began to find that a rather
mind-bending concept, particularly when I was trying to plot out the strategy.
Maybe if your enemy exists as an event's horizon and you exist as another one,
how thickens you going to figure out where he is?
Okay, listen. David has to flip the tape about it.